Revamp messaging metrics to support generic operations (#1006)
open-telemetry/semantic-conventions: docs/messaging/messaging-spans.md

### Span name

Messaging spans SHOULD follow the overall [guidelines for span names](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/v1.31.0/specification/trace/api.md#span).

<!-- markdown-link-check-disable -->
<!-- HTML anchors are not supported https://github.com/tcort/markdown-link-check/issues/225-->

> The **span name** SHOULD be `{messaging.operation.name} {destination}` (see below for the exact definition of the [`{destination}`](#destination-placeholder) placeholder).

Reviewer: What's the main reason for turning this around (the operation name before the destination)? Consistency with DB?

Author: Yes, with DB and HTTP - they all share the same pattern {verb} {target} which seems to be more English-friendly.

<!-- markdown-link-check-enable -->

If neither `{messaging.operation.name}` nor `{destination}` are available, span name SHOULD be `{messaging.system}`.

Semantic conventions for individual messaging systems MAY specify different span name format and then MUST document it in [semantic conventions for specific messaging technologies](#semantic-conventions-for-specific-messaging-technologies).

The <span id="destination-placeholder">`{destination}`</span> SHOULD describe the entity that the operation is performed against

> and SHOULD adhere to one of the following values, provided they are accessible:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and SHOULD adhere to the first applicable option from the following list:
```

Maybe that makes it a bit clearer?

Author: We discovered fallback to be problematic in DB semconv.

Let's say someone publishes a message to a temp destination and there is no template.
This operation usually (on other destinations) is called `publish {detaintion.name}`, but since it's a temp operation, the fallback would result in `publish {address:port}`.
So fallback would result in inconsistent operation names.

What we want is the entity operation is done against (broker or a specific queue|topic).
So instead of falling back, we'd rather not populate destination part of the span name.

> - `messaging.destination.template` or `messaging.destination.name` SHOULD be used for operations on messages or messaging destinations.
>   The `messaging.destination.template` SHOULD be used whenever it's available. Otherwise, `messaging.destination.name` SHOULD be used only when
>   the destination is known to be neither [temporary nor anonymous](#temporary-and-anonymous-destinations).
> - `server.address:server.port` SHOULD be used for other operations not targeting any specific destination(s).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. `messaging.destination.template` SHOULD be used when it is available.
2. `messaging.destination.name` SHOULD be used when the destination is known to be neither [temporary nor anonymous](#temporary-and-anonymous-destinations).
3. `server.address:server.port` SHOULD be used for other operations not targeting any specific destination(s).
4. Otherwise, no destination SHOULD be specified.
```

Author: rephrased a bit, thanks!

### Span name

Messaging spans MUST follow the overall [guidelines for span names](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/v1.31.0/specification/trace/api.md#span).

<!-- markdown-link-check-disable -->
<!-- HTML anchors are not supported https://github.com/tcort/markdown-link-check/issues/225-->
The **span name** SHOULD be `{messaging.operation.name} {destination}` (see below for the exact definition of the [`{destination}`](#destination-placeholder) placeholder).
<!-- markdown-link-check-enable -->

Semantic conventions for individual messaging systems MAY specify different span name format and then MUST document it in [semantic conventions for specific messaging technologies](#semantic-conventions-for-specific-messaging-technologies).

The <span id="destination-placeholder">`{destination}`</span> SHOULD adhere to one of the following values, arranged in prioritized order, provided they are accessible:

- `messaging.destination.template`

> - `messaging.destination.name` if it is known to be of a low cardinality.

Reviewer 2: can we say anything more specific than "low cardinality"? my specific concern is that generic messaging instrumentation may not be able to guarantee someone doesn't have 10,000 destinations and so the generic instrumentation might choose not to put this in the span name which I don't think is what we want

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `messaging.destination.name` if it is statically derived from application code or configuration.
```

Maybe that's better? This will result in a low cardinality in most cases, and avoids that instrumentation authors need to reason about what high or low cardinality means.

Author: I rephrased to 

> The `messaging.destination.template` SHOULD be used whenever it's available. Otherwise, `messaging.destination.name` SHOULD be used only when
  the destination is known to be neither [temporary nor anonymous](#temporary-and-anonymous-destinations).

WDYT?

(also aligned with our DB span name changes in #1069)

- `server.address:server.port`
- `messaging.system`

Examples:

* `publish shop.orders`
* `subscribe shop.orders`
* `ack shop.orders`
* `nack print_jobs `
* `process topic with spaces `
* `settle AuthenticationRequest-Conversations`

### Common messaging operations

The following operation types related to messages are defined for these semantic conventions:

> 

Reviewer: As we remove the operation type attribute, we shouldn't write about "operation types" anymore but only about "operation names".

Also we'd need to clarify the meaning of the table above. Would we recommend using those well-known names (if applicable)? Should we require systems to document other names that are used and not in this list? Do we always require the operation name "process" for processing operations?

Author: whether we remove it or not, we still need to establish terminology for the rest of the document. If we remove the attribute, we can add a note that it's the only goal and that type does not appear on the telemetry.

Author: resolving since we're keeping the operation type

| `create`       | A message is created or passed to a client library for publishing. "Create" spans always refer to a single message and are used to provide a unique creation context for messages in batch publishing scenarios. |
| `publish`      | One or more messages are provided for publishing to an intermediary. If a single message is published, the context of the "Publish" span can be used as the creation context and no "Create" span needs to be created. |
| `receive`      | One or more messages are requested by a consumer. This operation refers to pull-based scenarios, where consumers explicitly call methods of messaging SDKs to receive messages. |
| `process`      | One or more messages are processed by a consumer. |
| `settle`       | One or more messages are settled. |

### Span kind

> Span kind SHOULD be set according to the following table, based on the operation type a span describes.

Author: removing a link here for brevity because it's also mentioned under the table.

| `create`       | A message is created or passed to a client library for publishing. "Create" spans always refer to a single message and are used to provide a unique creation context for messages in batch publishing scenarios. |
| `publish`      | One or more messages are provided for publishing to an intermediary. If a single message is published, the context of the "Publish" span can be used as the creation context and no "Create" span needs to be created. |
| `receive`      | One or more messages are requested by a consumer. This operation refers to pull-based scenarios, where consumers explicitly call methods of messaging SDKs to receive messages. |
| `process`      | One or more messages are processed by a consumer. |
| `settle`       | One or more messages are settled. |

### Span kind

Span kind SHOULD be set according to the following table, based on the operation type a span describes.

| Operation type | Span kind|
|----------------|-------------|
| `create`       | `PRODUCER` |

> | `publish`      | `PRODUCER` if the context of the "Publish" span is used as creation context, `CLIENT` otherwise. |
> | `receive`    | `CONSUMER` |
> | `process`    | `CONSUMER` for push-based scenarios where no "Receive" span exists, `SERVER` otherwise. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `publish`      | `PRODUCER` if the context of the "Publish" span is used as creation context. |
| `receive`    | `CONSUMER` |
| `process`    | `CONSUMER` for push-based scenarios where no "Receive" span exists. |
```

Could we leave this out of this PR, and discuss this in a separate issue/PR?

I know of some tools (including Grafana Application Observability) that assume ephemeral (uninstrumented) services for client spans without corresponding server spans (and vice versa). This assumption can be valid for the "publish" case (where a possible server span would be part of a broker trace), however, it's not valid for the "process" case (there isn't really any upstream client span).

I'm not in principal against this change, but I'd like to think and reason more about it independently of metrics.

Reviewer: I created https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/issues/1112 to discuss this further.

Author: make sense, removed
